Chapter04: MicroProfile Open API (#13)
eclipse/microprofile-tutorial: chapter04/chapter04.adoc

Developers can quickly generate documentation for their microservices using MicroProfile OpenAPI. The documentation includes information on what services are provided, how to invoke them, and what data types are used. It generates comprehensive metadata about services, ensuring interoperability across diverse platforms and tools. Also, documentation can generate client code to access the web services.

This specification streamlines the creation of OpenAPI documentation for RESTful services using a unified approach. It generates comprehensive metadata about services, ensuring interoperability across diverse platforms and tools. The OpenAPI Specification fuels a rich ecosystem of tools that automate and support:

* *API Documentation Generation*: Intuitive interactive documentation portals emerge directly from the specification.
* *Client SDK Creation*: Client libraries in various languages can be automatically generated.
* *API Testing*: Testing frameworks can leverage the specification to design robust tests.

> * *API Mocking*: Simplifies mocking APIs for testing and development purposes.

Reviewer: I think the sentence starting with `The OpenAPI Specification fuels a rich ecosystem...` and the bullets may be better in the `OpenAPI Specification` above as it is not specific to the MicroProfile specification, but any OpenAPI.

Author: Fixed with https://github.com/ttelang/microprofile-tutorial/commit/11bbe4fe46a3702179da38ddf596f9ea01568641

=== Generating OpenAPI documents

There are multiple ways in which you can generate OpenAPI documents. The most common way is to use annotations. This only requires augmenting your Jakarta Restful Web Services annotations with OpenAPI annotations. 

> You can also use JSON or YAML files. You can start with a predefined model and manually update the entire OpenAPI document tree of your web services. However, the annotation-based approach is recommended as it is more maintainable and easier to understand. Finally, you can filter out the resources you do not want to document using configuration.

Reviewer: > You can also use JSON or YAML files. You can start with a predefined model and manually update the entire OpenAPI document tree of your web services.

This could be a little more clear. For example, something like "_Besides annotations, a predefined OpenAPI document may be provided in either YAML or JSON format. This so-called static model will be merged with the model generated by scanning for Jakarta REST endpoints and the combined result will be made available to clients_".

Author: Fixed with https://github.com/ttelang/microprofile-tutorial/commit/63f99ab89d0d99f29356ceea1c2f4dd5be43e1a4

To use MicroProfile OpenAPI in your project, you need to add the following maven coordinates to your project:

[source, xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.eclipse.microprofile.openapi</groupId>
  <artifactId>microprofile-openapi-api</artifactId>
  <version>3.1.1</version>
</dependency>
----

Below is an illustrative example of how you might annotate a method in the `ProductResource` class to achieve this documentation using MicroProfile OpenAPI annotations:

[source, java]
----
import org.eclipse.microprofile.openapi.annotations.Operation;
import org.eclipse.microprofile.openapi.annotations.responses.APIResponse;
import org.eclipse.microprofile.openapi.annotations.media.Content;
import org.eclipse.microprofile.openapi.annotations.media.Schema;
import org.eclipse.microprofile.openapi.annotations.responses.APIResponses;
import jakarta.ws.rs.GET;
import jakarta.ws.rs.Path;
import jakarta.ws.rs.Produces;
import jakarta.ws.rs.core.MediaType;
import java.util.List;

@Path("/products")
public class ProductResource {

    @GET
    @Produces(MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON)
    @Operation(summary = "List all products", description = "Retrieves a list of all available products")

>     @APIResponses(value = {

Reviewer: `@APIResponse` is repeatable, so you may omit `@APIResponses` if that helps it be more readable.

Author: Keeping it within container annotations to demonstrate it usage and better organization.

        @APIResponse(
            responseCode = "200",
            description = "Successful, list of products found",
            content = @Content(mediaType = "application/json",
                               schema = @Schema(implementation = Product.class, type = SchemaType.ARRAY))
        ),
        @APIResponse(
            responseCode = "400",
            description = "Unsuccessful, no products found",
            content = @Content(mediaType = "application/json")
        )
    })
    public List<Product> getProducts() {
        // Method implementation
    }
}
----

Explanation: 

* `@Operation`: Provides a summary and description for the `getProducts()` method.

* `@APIResponse`: Describes the possible responses from the `getProducts()` operation. In this case, a successful response (HTTP 200) is described, indicating that the method returns an array of Product entities.

* `@Schema`: Specifies the schema of the response content. Here, it is used to indicate that the method returns an array of Product objects.

These annotations enrich the `ProductResource` class with metadata necessary for generating comprehensive and descriptive OpenAPI documentation automatically.

> We have also annotated the `getProducts()` method with the @APIResponse annotation to document the successful response from the operation. The `responseCode` field is used to specify the status code of the response, and the `description` field is used to provide a brief description of the response. There are two possible responses – a successful response containing a list of produdts with a 200 status code, and an unsuccessful response with a 400 status code, if no products are found. The content field is used to specify the schema of the response content. In this example, the response content is a list of MyObjects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have also annotated the `getProducts()` method with the @APIResponse annotation to document the successful response from the operation. The `responseCode` field is used to specify the status code of the response, and the `description` field is used to provide a brief description of the response. There are two possible responses – a successful response containing a list of produdts with a 200 status code, and an unsuccessful response with a 400 status code, if no products are found. The content field is used to specify the schema of the response content. In this example, the response content is a list of `Product`s.
```

Finally, we need to add the following property to the src/main/resources/META-INF/microprofile-config.properties file:

----
mp.openapi.scan=true
----

This property tells MicroProfile OpenAPI to scan our classes for annotations and generate API documentation for them. 

Now that we have configured MicroProfile OpenAPI, we can build and run our application.

=== How to view the generated documentation

To view the generated documentation, we can use the OpenAPI UI tool. The Open API UI tool is a web-based tool that can be used to view the documentation for a REST API.

The OpenAPI UI tool can be accessed at the following URL:

----

> http://localhost:8080/openapi/

Reviewer: Just to note, the port isn't part of the specification and may vary depending on the server/runtime being used.

Author: Fixed with https://github.com/ttelang/microprofile-tutorial/commit/2e7a527447747d338c4748f088218dee0ddd4056

----

The `/openapi` endpoint is used to get information about the OpenAPI specification generated from the comments in the source code annotations. It returns information in YAML format.

> When we access the `http://localhost:8080/openapi.json` URL, we should see the API documentation that was generated by MicroProfile OpenAPI:

Reviewer: Drop the `.json`. YAML is the default response type, which is what is shown below :+1: 
```suggestion
When we access the `http://localhost:8080/openapi` URL, we should see the API documentation that was generated by MicroProfile OpenAPI:
```

      required:
      - name
      - description
      - price
      type: object
      properties:
        id:
          format: int64
          type: integer
        name:
          type: string
        description:
          type: string
        price:
          format: double
          type: number
----

As we can see, MicroProfile OpenAPI has generated API documentation for our resource class. We can use this documentation to learn about the API and how to use it. 

MicroProfile OpenAPI allows developers to produce these specifications directly from their codebase, leveraging annotations and/or providing OpenAPI documents statically. This direct generation ensures that the API documentation is always up to date with the code.

=== Exploring the APIs using Swagger UI

To open Swagger UI for the API documentation generated using MicroProfile OpenAPI, you will need to deploy your application to a server that supports MicroProfile, such as Open Liberty, WildFly, Quarkus, or Payara Micro. These servers automatically generate the OpenAPI documentation for your RESTful services based on the annotations in your code. 

Next, visit the following URL to launch the Swagger UI: 

----

> http://localhost:8080/openapi/ui

Reviewer 2: In Open Liberty, the port number is 9080. You might want to use <port> instead.

Author: Fixed with [c2128ed](https://github.com/ttelang/microprofile-tutorial/commit/c2128ed294e0008a58a54142aa74181607b029d6)

[cols="1,3", options="header"]
|===
| Annotations | Details

| @OpenAPIDefinition
| Provides metadata about the entire API. It can include information such as the title, description, version, terms of service, and contact information.

| @Info 
| Used inside @OpenAPIDefinition to provide API metadata like title, version, description.

| @Contact
| Specifies contact information for the API, used within @Info.

| @License 
| Defines the license information for the API, also used within @Info.

| @Operation
| Describes a single API operation on a resource.

| @APIResponse
| It is used to document a response from an operation.

| @APIResponses
| A container for multiple @APIResponse annotations, allowing documentation of different responses for a single API operation.

| @RequestBody
| Describes the request body of an HTTP request, specifying the content of the body and whether it is required.

| @Schema
| Provides schema details for a response or request body, specifying the data type, format, and constraints.

| @Parameter
| Provides information on parameters to the operation, including query parameters, header parameters, and path parameters.

| @ParameterIn

> | Specifies the location of a request parameter, such as `QUERY`, `PATH`, etc.

Reviewer: `ParameterIn` is an enum used within `@Parameter` rather an annotation itself.

Author: Fixed with https://github.com/ttelang/microprofile-tutorial/commit/81a5cb5c93271adad591991f8e8af694e387edb7
